Add peer.service semantic convention to indicate the name of a target… (#652)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md

If there is no such file (e.g., anonymous pipe),
the name should explicitly be set to the empty string to distinguish it from the case where the name is just unknown or not covered by the instrumentation.

## General remote service attributes

> These attributes may be used for any remote operation that applies to a service. Users can define what the name of a service is based on their particular semantics in their distributed system.

Reviewer: (How) should users be able to define the value of this attribute? They can define the value of the corresponding service.name resource attribute via env vars, but is it expected that the peer.service attribute is also user-configurable? How would that look? An URL-regex => Service name pattern that is provided in some global place for instrumentations to access?

Author: Heh lots of context here

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/issues/555

I have seen many cases of instrumentation providing the knob when initializing an instrument client.

Indeed for an agent with no code change, the napping is the only solution I've come up with

Reviewer: I think it is worth calling out explicitly that instrumentations are expected to receive this value via manual configuration, instead of setting it automatically.

Author: Good idea, added a note

If there is no such file (e.g., anonymous pipe),
the name should explicitly be set to the empty string to distinguish it from the case where the name is just unknown or not covered by the instrumentation.

## General remote service attributes

> These attributes may be used for any remote operation that applies to a service. Users will generally define what a service is, though instrumentation

Reviewer 2: Please clarify what should be done if a closer matching specific semantic convention already defines a dedicated attribute like the [RPC semantic conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/rpc.md#attributes) with their `rpc.service` attribute.

a) Should only the dedicated, specific attribute be set?
b) Should both be set to the same value? (probably not)
c) Does `peer.service` have a different semantic? If so, which?
d) Should `rpc.service` (and others, if any) be removed and instead reference/require `peer.service`?

Author: Hmm I'm thinking I should remove the point about automatically falling back to anything. I consider this a knob for users to customize how their traces look since in the end they'll often know best. One example is where the same proto file is mounted in a proxy and backend, then this really needs to be set by a user such that they can be differentiated.

On the flip side, I can't think of a good reason to fallback anything automatic anymore.

Will your point be cleared up if I remove the point about fallback?

Author: For now, removed the point about fallback, let me know if this could still use more detail

Reviewer 2: @anuraaga I was not concerned about the fallback wording but about the collision with existing, more specific attributes (at least `rpc.service`). This should be clarified. Which of the options I mentioned above a)-d) sounds most reasonable to you?

Author: I'd lean towards b) since this is basically a spot for users to customize - if they customized to be the same as the rpc service, we may as well preserve that as they probably have a reason for it. It's why I thought the fallback wording could be related - we could have some dedupe semantics when doing something automatic, but for this field since it's for users, I think we could give them free reign. Let me know if that makes sense, and if I can explain that better. I'm balancing vs not wordsmithing too much or would be happy to add some examples. @yurishkuro any thoughts?

Reviewer 2: If it would be the same value, it should be fine to just not set `peer.service` in this case as it doesn't add any value and it's optional anyway. If users have a named service that is one hierarchy level above the RPC endpoint's service identifier, setting different values could make sense. I could, for example, think of  a `ShopBackend` service (= `peer.service`) that exposes a `Pricing` RPC endpoint (= `rpc.service`) with a `getPrice` method (= `rpc.method`) among other RPC services. It would then be up to the backend, however, to put them in the right hierarchy or if that's not supported prefer one of the service names over the other.
Since this is not obvious, please mention that both service names could be the same (if the RPC endpoint is directly exposed, suggesting to leave the `peer.service` out) or different (if there is a logical hierarchy encompassing one or multiple RPC endpoints, thus both attributes should be specified) either here or in the RPC semconv.

Author: Thanks, I went ahead and added a note to rpc.md :)

> These attributes may be used for any remote operation that applies to a target service. Users will generally define what a service is, though instrumentation

Reviewer 3: I think mentioning "target" creates a bit of confusion, because `peer.service` attribute can be added both to client and server spans. I think we already should have a shared definition of what "peer" means, so it does not need to be repeated.

In addition, I am not sure we need to wordsmith the meaning of "service" either because it should have already been done for `resource.service.name`. The meaning of `peer.service` is identical, just for the remove peer.

Author: Ok I tried simplifying, let me know if this looks like what you were going for.

> may provide a fallback when not user-controlled based on instrumentation-specific behavior,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
may provide a fallback when not user-controlled based on instrumentation-specific behavior.
```
(or continue the sentence if unfinished 🙂)

|  Attribute name |                                 Notes and examples                                |
| :-------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `peer.service`    | Remote service name, indicating a semantic name for the target of the request. For example, for a Redis cache of auth tokens, this may be `AuthCache`. Note that this usually does not relate to transport-level names like `net.*.names` attributes above, for example when the service is sharded and accessible from several endpoints. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `peer.service`  | Remote service name, indicating a semantic name for the target of the request. For example, for a Redis cache of auth tokens, this may be `AuthCache`. Note that this usually does not relate to transport-level names like `net.*.name` attributes above, for example when the service is sharded and accessible from several endpoints. |
```

> | `peer.service`    | Remote service name, indicating a semantic name for the target of the request. For example, for a Redis cache of auth tokens, this may be `AuthCache`. Note that this usually does not relate to transport-level names like `net.*.names` attributes above, for example when the service is sharded and accessible from several endpoints. |

Reviewer: Also, net.peer.name is (usually) only a DNS hostname, so even for a non-sharded service, you could have `bigserver1.mycompany.example.net` as net.peer.name, and `webauth` as `net.peer.service` (the logical service might be identified only with the combination of host+port, or with some prefix of http.url).

If there is no such file (e.g., anonymous pipe),
the name should explicitly be set to the empty string to distinguish it from the case where the name is just unknown or not covered by the instrumentation.

> ## General remote service attributes

Reviewer 2: Please update the TOC as mentioned in line 7 and we're good to go! :)

> These attributes may be used for any remote operation that applies to a service. Users can define what the name of a service is based on their particular semantics in their distributed system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These attributes may be used for any operation that accesses some remote service. Users can define what the name of a service is based on their particular semantics in their distributed system.
```

> These attributes may be used for any operation that accesses some remote service. Users can define what the name of a service is based on their particular semantics in their distributed system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This attribute may be used for any operation that accesses some remote service.
Users can define what the name of a service is based on their particular semantics in their distributed system.
```

> Instrumentation is expected to provide a way for users to configure this name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instrumentations SHOULD provide a way for users to configure this name.
```

|  Attribute name |                                 Notes and examples                                |
| :-------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `peer.service`  | Logical name of the service. <br/> MUST be the same for all instances of horizontally scaled services. |

Reviewer: I would expect this attribute to be defined in terms of service.name.

```suggestion
| `peer.service`  | The (hypothetical) [`service.name`](../../resources/resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service) of the remote service. SHOULD be equal to the actual `service.name` resource attribute of the remote service if any. |
```

> | `peer.service`  | The (hypothetical) [`service.name`](../../resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service) of the remote service. SHOULD be equal to the actual `service.name` resource attribute of the remote service if any. |

Reviewer 3: why "hypothetical"?

Reviewer: Because the other end might not be instrumented at all, e.g. see the Redis sample below. The redis process will probably not be instrumented with OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer 3: That does not explain the term "hypothetical" - there's a real service on the other side, instrumented or not. If I am calling a service and, for example, use name X to discover that service, then peer.service=X and it's not hypothetical.

Reviewer: Hmm, I just meant the service.name resource attribute is hypothetical.

Reviewer 3: I would leave it simply as `service.name` without qualifiers, as the qualifier only makes the situation more confusing. If instrumentation doesn't know the peer service name, then the tag is optional.

Reviewer: I don't think the "hypothetical" is confusing, especially if you also read the next sentence, but I'm also OK with removing it.

Author: I went ahead and removed hypothetical, don't think it's confusing, but I guess it's not needed either so can reduce the text a bit.

> | `peer.service`  | The (hypothetical) [`service.name`](../../resources/resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service) of the remote service. SHOULD be equal to the actual `service.name` resource attribute of the remote service if any. |

Reviewer: Sorry, my suggestion contained a bad link. This one should work:

```suggestion
| `peer.service`  | The (hypothetical) [`service.name`](../../resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service) of the remote service. SHOULD be equal to the actual `service.name` resource attribute of the remote service if any. |
```

Examples of `peer.service` that users may specify:

> - A Redis cache of auth tokens. `peer.service=AuthTokenCache`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A Redis cache of auth tokens as `peer.service="AuthTokenCache"`.
```

> - A gRPC service `rpc.service=io.opentelemetry.AuthService` may be hosted in both a gateway, `peer.service=ExternalApiService` and a backend, `peer.service=AuthService`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A gRPC service `rpc.service="io.opentelemetry.AuthService"` may be hosted in both a gateway, `peer.service="ExternalApiService"` and a backend, `peer.service="AuthService"`.
```
